. In another early study aimed at quantifying roughness, \cite{Beasom1983} presented the land surface ruggedness index, which is based on the total length of contour lines per area. Similarly analysing topographic maps, \cite{Nellemann1994} describe the calculation of a terrain ruggedness index based on the variability of contour lines along transects, which they correlate with caribou forage availability. Regarding field methods, they calculate micro-topographic diversity by analysing the horizontal distance of a chain laid on the ground in their study plots. proposed the topographic ruggedness index (TRI), which compares the elevation of a central pixel to the elevations of cells within a given search window. In an attempt to decorrelate roughness from slope, \cite{Sappington2007} expanded on the work of \cite{Hobson1972} to introduce vector ruggedness measure (VRM), which is calculated based on the orientation of vectors normal to the surface in a given area. \citep{Grohmann2010} analysed several roughness measures at different resolutions and window sizes with regard to their ability to depict terrain features. They highlight the ability of VRM to detect fine-scale roughness features and attribute low roughness values to steep but smooth slopes, but also acknowledge its inability to delimit slope breaks and identify regional relief. The Melton ruggedness index, which relates  the elevation difference of a basin to the drainage area, was applied by \cite{Marchi2005} to investigate sediment transport, however compared to VRM  it is more of a measure of general relief than roughness. Similar to VRM, roughness measures based on eigenvalue ratios of an orientation matrix have been used in geology to describe land surfaces, especially bedrock fabric.  combined such a roughness measures with parameters representing the drainage network of the investigated geologic units  to create terrain characterisation types to distinguish various lithologies, with emphasis on discriminating soft and hard rock areas.


This data mining procedure was applied to several groups of terrain parameters. One group included all computed terrain parameters, while other groups focus either on local or regional terrain parameters, or parameters related to surface roughness.

 and discuss how they can be related to and interpreted with regard to soil formation and the distribution of soil units. 
